---
author: ["Shweata N. Hegde"]
title: "Term 06 | The Welfare State | Critical Reading Notes on Bread For All (Introduction)" 
date: 2025-05-13
description: ""
tags: ["assignments", "term-06"]
ShowToc: true
---
Reading excerpts from Bread For All by Chris Renwick was my first introduction to Social History. I found Social History fascinating because it weaves together the lived experiences of people from the past. What piqued my interest was how there are certain culminating events in history—such as the Beveridge Report becoming popular—but the event in itself does not tell us the whole story. It is only when we situate that event in the mundane of every day and look at the ideas of the time, does the real picture of the past emerges. In that regard, I was drawn to the work of journalist Charles Madge, the anthropologist Tom Harrisson, and the filmmaker Humphrey Jennings in documenting the “Collective unconscious” through  “Mass-Observations”.  In particular, there was this statement on why British people, particularly middle-class people, were having smaller families than they had in the past, which read: “People lacked faith in the future. Not a belief that things are going to be tough, and it will take a long time to get right ... But a belief that nobody’s going to try and put things right and improve them, that the nation is going to muddle on through the chaoses [sic] of another 1919–39 to another world war in 1965.” 

Did this collective unconscious influence Beveridge when he wrote his report, when he proposed his new imagination for a welfare state, or when he said, “Bread for all before cake for anybody”? I believe so. It also made me wonder, what is the collective unconscious of the present India? Is there still a doomist perspective on life, in general? The first thought that came to me was climate change. I cannot speak for all, but at least in urban spaces, there is growing climate anxiety as extreme weather events become more frequent. I have heard some friends say they do not want to have kids because they worry the world might not be a conducive place to live. Access to healthcare—which is, in part, also influenced by climate change—is still a major concern, too. However, on second thought, I realised that the existence of the internet and social media might influence the collective unconscious. Maybe if one can sift through the polarised debates, misinformation and hoaxes, an understanding of the collective unconscious emerges. Or perhaps studying these polarised debates itself gives us a pulse for what society is thinking about?

It is still interesting to ponder how might this collective unconscious influence the functioning of society. How, if at all, might it influence the welfare state? Maybe, time will tell?
