---
author: ["Shweata N. Hegde"]
title: "Term 06 | Op-Ed | India's Foreign Policy | Wildlife To Bring Together India and Pakistan?" 
date: 2025-05-13
description: ""
tags: ["assignments", "term-06"]
ShowToc: true
---
“Twin orphaned bear cubs given shelter near India-Pakistan border”, read a Reuters News headline. In 2021, two Asiatic Bear cubs were found on the Pakistani side of Kashmir. Unable to open their eyes, the cubs could barely manage to crawl away from the border. Their mother? She was never to be found on the Pakistani side; she was probably killed at the Indian border, either due to the fencing or landmines. The long-standing disputes between India and Pakistan have led to the two countries taking extreme measures; the electric fence being one of them. The fencing of the Line Of Control (LoC) completed in 2004 was meant to prevent the illegal entry of militants. But it has inadvertently also caused incredible damage to habitats at the border—spanning cold deserts, mountains and hot deserts. Locals and forest officials on both sides of the border recount countless stories of lost wildlife—such as separated cubs, deer injured by landmines, or leopards killed for human safety—all as a direct consequence of border control and fencing. But who is to listen? Both countries are too busy strategising their next wars or attacks.

Asiatic Bears are one of many threatened border species. Recent data indicates that 82% of global border hotspots for threatened transboundary species are located in Asia. With the global biodiversity loss rate being 100 times greater than the baseline, I believe that it is high time that India and Pakistan—two Asian countries with moderately high transboundary biodiversity—collaborate and initiate dialogue for this pressing need for conservation. However, a study determining the feasibility of the conservation of these species, published in Nature Ecology and Evolution, gave the India-Pakistan border a low feasibility score. The border scored lower in collaboration and shared governance between the two countries, and higher on human pressure due to ongoing conflicts and war activities. With over three wars fought between the two countries in the 77 years of their existence, the India-Pakistan border is one of the most militarized zones in the world. Conflicts and attacks have long neglected biodiversity, leading to habitat fragmentation (particularly for territorial animals), disrupted migration, destruction of habitats, and even inadvertent killings of animals. Furthermore, the lack of research and conservation activities in these regions only exacerbates the problem at hand, as the lack of data de-incentivises the countries from taking action. While attempting to find research on prior conservation activities, I was disappointed by this research gap. A researcher studying Markhor (Pakistan’s national animal) on the Indian side of Kashmir in an interview with a Turkish public broadcaster said “Most of the time security might [ask] you, ‘why are you contacting these people [in Pakistan]?’. Initially, the situation there [in Jammu and Kashmir] was so bad that I was sort of afraid to contact people from Pakistan.” This distrust between the officials and people further threatens the endangered species.

How have other Asian countries handled conservational efforts at their borders? Going back to the feasibility index study, we find a positive example of cooperation leading to better conservation. One of the richest biodiversity hotspots, the island of Bruneo, occupied by Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei, has managed to preserve the interiors of the island through legally binding government commitments. One could argue that these three countries have been generally cordial to each other making it easier to collaborate. However, are there examples of countries collaborating on biodiversity conservation despite a history of disputes?

The Demilitarised Zone between the two Koreas is an extreme example, where fear inadvertently has led to conservation. A narrow strip at the borders, 4 kilometres wide and 250 kilometres across, with very minimal human inhabitants for the past 70 years, has become a biodiversity-rich region in Korea. Estimates by South Korea suggest that the region is home to more than 5000 species including 100 that are protected. However, the region is still fenced and guarded. Paradoxically, the only reason why the Demilitarized zone is not yet exploited is the fear of war and conflicts rather than peace declarations. Beyond Asia, in conflicted areas such as Israel and Palestine, researchers are trying to collaborate to minimise the effects of war on biodiversity. Recently this March, as reported by Nature, researchers from Israel and Palestine came together to study the potential for barn owls to reduce pesticide use in agriculture, after the ceasefire was declared. 

Given the urgency biodiversity loss—accelerated further by climate change, pollution and other challenges—it is crucial for Pakistan and India to come together to address the issue. I propose that the two countries take these three crucial steps, taking into consideration the existing differences: define peace parks at the boundaries, continue ceasefires, and exercise empathy.
Peace Parks are “a clearly defined geographical space that consists of protected areas that are ecologically connected across one or more international boundaries and involve some form of cooperation”. Researchers' top recommendation for this is Siachen (mountain glacier region in the Himalayas) which is home to snow leopards and a place where tributaries of Indus merge. Siachen Peace Park would help conserve snow leopards while preventing the water pollution presently being caused by the armies. Similarly, the countries could also recognise certain flagship species to draw the attention of political leaders and concerned people. Experts have identified five species corresponding to five ecological epochs found at the India-Pakistan border. This includes Snow Leopards from the Trans-Himalayan region, Kashmir Markhor in the Himalayan region, Bar-headed Goose in the Semi-Arid region, Great Indian Bustard in the Desert region, and Indian Wild Ass in the Rann of Kutch. Peace Park could also signal the beginning of a peaceful relationship between India and Pakistan.

Ceasefires, on the other hand, can have immediate benefits to the ecosystem. For instance, the ceasefire reinforcement in 2022 led to an additional 15 migratory bird species (alongside usual visitors such as bar-headed goose) being seen in the Gharana wetland region. Additionally, removal of landmines would prevent unnecessary deaths of animals. Although exact damages are unknown, both the Russia-Ukraine and the Israel-Palestine conflicts have shown the devastating impacts of war on biodiversity, which should become a lesson for all countries in conflict including India and Pakistan to not go into wars in future. Finally, exercise empathy and compassion for fellow humans and individuals of other species. Empathy at a people-to-people level and at the diplomatic level would go a long way with conservation efforts. A simple recollection in our collective conscious of bear cubs separated from their mother because of a human-made fenced border is enough to remind ourselves of devastating consequences of borders on wildlife.
Countries are constructs of humans; no other species defines boundaries in their habitats. Impositions of our boundaries cannot have spillover effects. Therefore, countries must make peace to co-exist with fellow species on the planet. Animals like Asiatic bears at the India-Pakistan border should be able to move freely, claiming back all their territory, and living their regular lives. India and Pakistan might be divided by their conflict over land acquisition, however, they must come together to give back the very same land to ones that equally are part of the planet: wildlife.
