---
author: ["Shweata N. Hegde"]
title: "Term 06 | Op-Ed | India's Foreign Policy | Need for a Science Policy Discourse in Formal Research Spaces" 
date: 2025-05-13
description: ""
tags: ["assignments", "term-06"]
ShowToc: true
---
As a student of science and education at a government college, I had no encouragement to keep up with current affairs. After all, my tasks were that of “pure science” like running experiments in labs. However, as years passed, I started having a more outward look, beyond the lab, and realised that science happens not in isolation. The very establishment where I perform experiments is shaped by societal context, and most importantly, local, national and global politics. For instance, if the funding agencies decided to cut funding to my institution, I would not have the chemicals to perform experiments.

In fact, fund cuts are a reality now. Recently in January 2025, the U.S. President Donald Trump put in place a 90-day freeze on foreign assistance under the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). Although only 0.2% of USAID’s funds were flowing into India, the freeze has resulted in suspension of projects related to health (including HIV/AIDS, TB, maternal and child health, and immunisation programmes), economy, energy, water supply and sanitation, and environmental health. Many researchers involved in these projects might soon lose their jobs. If science policies are critical in shaping the lives of us, academic students and researchers, why is it not part of mainstream discussions in formal educational spaces?

Science policy discourses are more important than ever in India since funding constraints science. India spends only 0.6-0.7% of its GDP on Gross Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD). Significant proportions of the funding pours in from the private sector and, lately, through bilateral and multilateral agreements with countries and organizations like the European Union, UKRI (United Kingdom Research and Innovation), BRICS, and others. Central Government and  Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) take up 50% of the expenditure, whereas, the State Governments get a mere 6.7%. However, most of India’s researchers are in these state government institutions. Therefore, researchers, specifically from state universities, are disadvantaged since neither do they get fundings from the government nor are they internationally collaborating. Since Science and Technology is increasingly seen as “soft power” by many countries, researchers—in order to secure independent funding through collaborative programmes—must be aware of the vested interest of the countries involved in bilateral and multilateral agreements. More importantly, in order for India to become an emergent leader in science, academia should exert force on the government to increase its expenditure on Research and Development.

Finally, as mentioned before, science does not happen in isolation. Scientifc conclusions often have the potential to inform policies that impact the public. Therefore, as researchers, we must think of ourselves as either ‘Science Arbiters’ (who seek to engage and answer factual questions and queries) or ‘Honest Broker of Policy Alternatives’ (who aims to provide an impartial overview of all scientifically legitimate policy alternatives, strengths and weaknesses and their tolerances and uncertainties). Specifically, scientists in India, working on global issues such as climate change, biodiversity loss, and other environmental issues need to be given greater agency to communicate their findings to influence foreign policies, which might affect our country. A study from 2011 found that Europe and North America dominate participation in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (73%). 45% of countries have never contributed as authors in the IPCC  process.

Therefore, in order to understand the impact of science policies on our research and infleunce them, scientists must be a critical observer of the discourse. Questions about policy—both local and global— should be discussed such as: What are the major science policies in India? What are the internal and external politics shaping them? What does the removal of the DEI policy in the U.S. or its withdrawal from WHO mean to research and development and public health in India? Were these policy decisions made in consultation with scientists? How are climate deals impacting India’s research system? How can research in our labs contribute to policy-making? Science policy 101 must be part of the science education curriculum. At the very least, the discourse around science policies should be given more space and time in classrooms and labs. There is a close interlinkage between science and politics—science we do shapes the foreign policies, and the policies shape the science we do. Science is an individual pursuit, yes, but it is also international and collaborative.
